Unit 06 - Modeler
=================

**Graphic Modeler** allows creating, editing, and managing complex
models using easy-to-use user interface. Using Graphical Modeler, that
chain of processes (ie. GRASS modules) can be wrapped into one process
(ie. model). So it's easier to execute the model repeatly with
slightly different inputs or parameters.

We start with simple model based on :doc:`05`. The module will compute
in current computational region NDVI by :grasscmd:`i.vi`
module. Actually the model will perform two operations:

#. Set mask based on vector cloud mask file (:grasscmd:`r.mask`)
#. Compute NDVI (:grasscmd:`i.vi`)

Graphical Modeler can be launched from menu :menuselection:`File -->
Graphical modeler` or by |grass-modeler-main| :sup:`Graphical Modeler`
from main toolbar (or alternatively as :grasscmd:`g.gui.gmodeler`
module from console).

.. figure:: ../images/units/06/gmodeler.png

   Graphical Modeler.
   
GRASS modules can be added to the model by :menuselection:`Model -->
Add command` or by |grass-module-add| :sup:`Add command (GRASS module) to the
model` from main toolbar.

.. figure:: ../images/units/06/add-module.png
   :class: small
   
   Add commands (GRASS modules) to the model, in this case :grasscmd:`r.mask`.

After adding :grasscmd:`r.mask` let's open properties dialog by
double-click and enter vector map used as a mask. Don't forget to
enable inverse mask by :option:`-i` flag.

.. figure:: ../images/units/06/module-props.png
   
   Define parameters for :grasscmd:`r.mask`, a vector map used as for
   creating a mask.

In similar way will be added to the model second command
:grasscmd:`i.vi` (Properties dialog for this command is open
automatically becase there are required options which must be set).

.. figure:: ../images/units/06/model-v1.png

   NDVI model in version 1.

It's good idea to set metadata for the model and enable overwritting
data produced by model (:menuselection:`Model --> Model properties`).

.. figure:: ../images/units/06/model-v1-props.svg
   :class: small
   
   Define model properties and enable overwriting data produced by
   model.

Let's try out our first model. Before running the model we should
change computation region. The easier way is to use *Set computation
region extent iteractively* using |grass-zoom-more| :sup:`Various zoom
options`.

.. note:: Before changing the region it's useful to remove existing
          mask in order to see whole Sentinel scene.

          .. code-block:: bash

             r.mask -r

.. figure:: ../images/units/06/model-v1-region.png

   Changed computation region before running the model.

Now let's run our model by |grass-execute| :sup:`Run model`. Progress
is prited into :item:`Command output`.

.. figure:: ../images/units/06/model-v1-output.png

   Model computation progress.

After redrawing map display (assuming that we have already displayed
raster map of NDVI in map display), you should see a difference.

.. figure:: ../images/units/06/model-v1-display.png

   New NDVI raster map computed by the model.

