Unit 12 - Script tuning
=======================

In :doc:`10` and :doc:`11` we gain basic knowledge of GRASS Scripting
Library, we know how to run GRASS modules using different functions
(:grass-script:`core.run_command`, :grass-script:`core.read_command`,
and :grass-script:`core.parse_command`). We also read how to parse
module output in simply way. Beside :grass-script:`core` package the
GRASS Scripting Library offers helper module for various GRASS
operations.

* :grasscmd2:`db <libpython/script.html#module-script.db>` Database
  related functions to be used in Python scripts.
* :grasscmd2:`raster <libpython/script.html#module-script.raster>`
  Raster related functions to be used in Python scripts.
* :grasscmd2:`raster3d <libpython/script.html#module-script.raster3d>`
  Raster3d related functions to be used in Python scripts.
* :grasscmd2:`vector <libpython/script.html#module-script.vector>` Vector
  related functions to be used in Python scripts.

These modules contains useful functions which can simplify our
scripts. In our case we could replace :grasscmd:`v.db.select` caller
by :grass-script:`vector.vector_db_select` function. In other worlds
replace code below

.. code-block:: python
                
    # v.db.select: don't print column names (-c)
    ret = read_command('v.db.select', flags='c', map='ndvi_vector', separator='comma')
    for line in ret.splitlines():
        # parse line (eg. 1,,-0.433962264150943,0.740350877192983,0.051388909449992)
        cat,label,min,max,mean = line.split(',')
        print ('NDVI class {0}: {1:.4f} (min) {2:.4f} (max) {3:.4f} (mean)'.format(
        cat, float(min), float(max), float(mean)))

by

.. code-block:: python

    from grass.script.vector import vector_db_select
    data = vector_db_select('ndvi_vector')
    for vals in data['values'].itervalues():
        # unfortunately we need to cast values by float
        print ('NDVI class {0}: {1:.4f} (min) {2:.4f} (max) {3:.4f} (mean)'.format(
        vals[0], float(vals[2]), float(vals[3]), float(vals[4])))               

There is one problem with our script, some modules
(:grasscmd:`r.recode`, :grasscmd:`r.colors`) uses hardcoded path to
input files. This will not work when running script on different
computer as we know. See code below (concretely ``rules`` options).

.. code-block:: python

    run_command("r.recode",
                overwrite = True,
                input = "ndvi",
                output = "ndvi_class",
                rules = "/home/landa/geodata/jena/models/reclass.txt")

    run_command("r.colors",
                map = "ndvi_class",
                rules = "/home/landa/geodata/jena/models/colors.txt")

By GRASS Scripting Library we can define content of input file as a
string object and transfer it to the command via standard input. This
opetration allows :grass-script:`core.feed_command` function.

.. code-block:: python

     p1 = feed_command("r.recode",
                       overwrite = True,
                       input = "ndvi",
                       output = "ndvi_class",
                       rules = "-")
     p1.stdin.write("""-1:0.1:1
 0.1:0.5:2
 0.5:1:3""")
     p1.stdin.close()
     p1.wait()

     p2 = feed_command("r.colors",
                       map = "ndvi_class",
                       rules = "-")
     p2.stdin.write("""1 grey
 2 255 255 0
 3 green""")
     p2.stdin.close()
     p2.wait()

First command object is created, input string written to stdin, closed
and than command finally performed by ``wait()``.
     
.. todo:: add note about pyGRASS
               
Our script lacks user input, let's change it.

Parameterization
----------------

.. todo:: link to model version 3        
