Unit 24 - Lidar
===============

.. todo:: move to unit 18?

There is open Lidar data for Thuringia region available, see related
`blog
<https://rapidlasso.com/2017/01/09/second-german-state-goes-open-lidar/>`__. Go
to `Download Höhendaten
<http://www.geoportal-th.de/de-de/Downloadbereiche/Download-Offene-Geodaten-Th%C3%BCringen/Download-H%C3%B6hendaten>`__,
choose region in map viewer and download selected tiles.

Tiles used in this unit can be found in sample dataset, in
:file:`lidar` folder (tiles ``681-682/5644-5646``). Data is stored in
LAZ (compressed LAS format).
   
Import data
-----------

At first we will create a new GRASS location defined by :epsg:`25832`,
see :ref:`Unit 18 <create-location-epsg>` for details.

LAS/LAZ format
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For importing LAS/LAZ data are available two modules:

* :grasscmd:`r.in.lidar` for importing point cloud data as raster map
* :grasscmd:`v.in.lidar` for importing point cloud data as vector point map

.. note:: GRASS requires `libLAS <http://www.liblas.org>`_ library for
   reading LAS data. For compressed LAS (LAZ) there is another
   dependency `laszip <https://www.laszip.org/>`__ library.

   Basic metadata can be obtained by command line utility ``lasinfo``
   which is part of libLAS library.

   .. code-block:: bash

      lasinfo las_681_5644_1_th_2014-2019.laz

      ...
      Min X Y Z:                   531815.05 5625597.55 925.35
      Max X Y Z:                   534548.84 5627727.26 1292.54
      Spatial Reference:           None

   .. todo:: update
                             
Let's try to import selected tile into vector point map first. Flag
:option:`-t` skips creation of attribute table. The import process
will be significantly faster. Information about data SRS can be
missing, we will skip projection check by :option:`-o` flag.

.. code-block:: bash
                
   v.in.lidar -ot input=las_681_5644_1_th_2014-2019.laz output=las_681_5644

We can also check the point overall point density by
:grasscmd:`v.outlier`:

.. code-block:: bash
             
   v.outlier -e input=las_681_5644

   Estimated point density: 0.6418
   Estimated mean distance between points: 1.248

Now let's try import into raster map. Flag :option:`-e` extends
current computational region to cover all imported points. Otherwise
user needs to set up computational region via
:grasscmd:`g.region`. Spatial resolution for output raster map is
defined by :option:`resolution` option. Note that computational region
is ignored when importing data using :grasscmd:`v.in.lidar`.
   
.. code-block:: bash

   r.in.lidar -oe input=las_681_5644_1_th_2014-2019.laz output=las_681_5644 resolution=1

Basic metadata about imported created raster maps can be optained by
:grasscmd:`r.info`, or :grasscmd:`v.info` in the case of vector maps.

.. code-block:: bash

   r.info map=las_681_5644

   ...
   ...

.. code-block:: bash
                   
   v.info map=las_681_5644

   ...
   ...

.. todo:: image
             
High resolution DEM
-------------------

DEM will interpolated by :grasscmd:`v.surf.rst` using regularized
spline with tension approximation. Output resultion will be set to ?
meter. Since the interpolation process can be *very slow* we will
perform the computation on smaller area.

.. code-block:: bash

   g.region vector=las_681_5644 res=1 -pa
   v.surf.rst input=las_681_5644 elevation=dem_681_5644 npmin=80 tension=20 smooth=1

.. tip:: Set higher npmin to reduce artifacts from segmentation
   visible on slope and curvature maps (will be much slower!):

   .. code-block:: bash
                
      g.region n=5626866 s=5626530 w=532642 e=533062 res=0.5 -pa
      
.. todo:: image
